High in this video we're going to continue our diving to booleans and we're going to look at operators.
We're going to look at operator precedence and we'll also look at what short circuit evaluation is and
how it works.
So first of all the boolean operators are not and and Oh and here's a truth table.
And if you haven't seen a truth table before it's actually pretty straightforward.
We just list out all the possible combinations of our input variables.
In this case I'm looking at two input variables x and y.
So the variables can be false or true.
I'm using a 0 for false and 1 for true.
So if X is false then not X will be true not false is true.
Similarly not true would be false or if we have two input variables like X and Y or X or Y Y or if we
take false and false that will be false and false or false would be false as well.
On the other hand True and False would be false but true or false would be true.
So that's just what a truth table is it's just a pretty straightforward way of listing of all the possible
combinations of your input variables and then listing out with the result of whatever boolean expression
is.
Another way to also look at these boolean operators is to think of electrical circuits and to think
of switches in an electrical circuit.
So his intellect thought of an electrical circuit.
Let's say we have current that's coming into this side on the left hand we have a switch.
Now the switch can be open in which case no current is flowing out of the switch.
And so we would consider this to be in a false state.
Right.
The result would be in a fault state when all switches open or false on the other hand if we close the
switch when the switch is closed we consider the switch to be in a true state and it actually allows
current to flow through.
And so if we have current coming in on this side then we have current coming on on this side and we
will consider that as a true result.
So the or can be expressed as two switches in parallel and so X or Y means that current is coming in
and then bifurcates and it flows through both branches here.
So you can see that if X is closed if X is true then the current will actually flow out of the switch.
And so we end up with a true result.
So this is the situation we have here.
X is true and Y is false.
It's open.
And yet the result of our operation or operation is one is true.
Right.
So this is how it work.
So if X is true it doesn't matter what the state is of the second switch the result will always be true.
And in fact we see that his right.
If X is true then the order is always true irrespective of what why was.
Now similarly we can look at and and and we can represent as two switches in series.
And again we can just make their boolean values something so we can keep X Open which would be false
and we can make y close which would be true.
But you'll notice that if either of the switches are open then the current can't flow through.
There's no way it can.
So when X is false let's say it's these first two rows then it doesn't matter what y is the result will
still be false.
So we have this result here false and false claim.
All right.
So let's look at some properties of the boolean operators.
So let's look at commuter Tivoli Now community B just means that a or b is the same as B or A and A
and B is the same as being a doesn't matter which order you do that we'll have distributivity.
So A and B or C is the same thing as A and B or A and C we can distribute this and this and throughout
the expression inside the parentheses.
And that's I think here A or B and C is A or B and A or C..
So hopefully you've seen all these things before.
I'm just refreshing your memory.
Now we'll have associativity now associativity just says that you can group your or operators if you
have multiple in any order you want that it doesn't matter.
So A or B or C is the same thing as saying A or B or C and so therefore we can write without any ambiguity
A or B or C without parentheses.
Now when we evaluate it or Python evaluates an expression such as this it will have to pick an older
and which to evaluate the all the others.
It's going to have to pick one right and the same thing happens with and a and b and c is the same thing
as A and B and C.
So again we can write it without any ambiguity as a and b and c and so what's going to happen with Python
it's going to do a left to right evaluation.
So in this case here it's actually going to do this.
It's going to evaluate a or b and then or have C and the same thing with a and b it will evaluate that
first and then and that C but of course it doesn't matter which direction you do it in.
If it's left right or right to left they're all exactly equivalent then we have the Mogens laws which
basically tells you how you can distribute the not operator inside the parentheses so not AOB it gives
us not a and not be.
You'll notice that when we did the distribution of the not the off change to n and.
And then the similar thing.
And except that the end changes to it all.
So those are called the Morgan's laws.
And then just a few other miscellaneous things that also might be helpful when you're trying to look
at boolean expressions and maybe trying to simplify them so that you can make your statements for example
you are a little easier to understand.
Keep in mind that not X less than Y.
So if x is not less than Y It means that x is greater than or equal to Y.
Right.
So the nub of that becomes this operate a hinge.
Similarly if we have not X less than or equal to Y.
So if x is not less than or equal to y.
Really it just means that x is greater than Y.
And then we have the same thing with the other with the greater than and the greater than or equal to
works the same way we just flip the operator around and then we add or remove the equal sign depending
on where it was also not not a is the same thing as a.
So double not just comes back to the original value.
So let's look at operator precedence.
Now and I'm including the parentheses even though they're technically not an operator but they do play
into the precedence of operators and we'll see that in the second.
And you've seen this before already.
Anyway so here we have some operators.
These are comparison operators like less than greater than equal to not equal two in is.
We've seen all these operators before.
Then we have not we have and and we have.
Oh and the way that I've listed all these things out is that this is an order of highest to lowest precedence.
What does that mean.
Well let's look at an example let's look at this expression.
So we need to start evaluating this expression.
What what where do we start.
Do we do.
True.
All true.
First and then and that were false.
And the answer is no and has a higher precedence than all.
So in reality we have to evaluate true and false false.
So that's the first thing we do.
So now we end up with true or false sense true and false is false.
And now we can finally evaluate true or false.
And we get true.
Now this is not the same as if we had done the other way.
And so to make this clear let's put true or true this will not force the off to happen first which wouldn't
have happened here because of the precedence of and being higher than the precedence of or in this case
because of the parentheses we have to evaluate that first.
So we're going to evaluate true true and true or true is true.
And then we and that were false which ends us were false.
So as you can see the order in which the Poles and the ends are evaluated in an expression like this
matters.
It makes a difference.
So because of that we need a precedence essentially definition that tells us well in the case where
you haven't specified these parentheses what older should happen what order should be used.
So that's what the precedence is for.
But when in doubt ought to be absolutely sure used parentheses.
There's nothing wrong with putting a few extra parentheses in your expressions if it helps make it clear.
For example it's perfectly fine to write true or true and false.
That's OK.
And yes you technically don't need the parentheses but you know it that's more readable.
You can understand what's going on.
And that's a key part to a lot of code is you really want to try and make your code not just efficient
for the machine to handle but you also don't want to make it human readable.
Humans are going to read your code.
Other people are going to read your code.
You might read your own code and if you do it six months later and you made it very difficult to understand
you'll probably be looking at it scratching your head saying What was I thinking.
I know what happens to me all the time.
So it's important to make code human readable and comments is one way of helping but that's not the
only way just having nicely formatted code simplify your simplified code it makes a big difference.
For example look at this.
Look at this expression.
Here's a less than B or A greater than c and not X or Y.
I'm sure you're scratching your head thinking what is this thing doing.
And you know what so is Bob Bob really confused like what's going on.
And of course we want to make sure Bob is not confused.
So let's take a look.
Well the precedence here means that the less than and greater than have to be evaluated first.
So those expressions are going to be evaluated before any of the other ones.
Then next in the order of precedence is not.
And here we have this not X so that will get evaluated next.
So now we have some some value here that say X or let's say on capital 8 or capital B and capital C
or Y.
Right.
That's kind of what we have.
So we have these or and N or operators that are left but again and has a higher precedence than on.
So we have to evaluate now this and felt and now we're left with just something or something or something.
And as we said before it doesn't matter which order you do the O's it's a or b or c it doesn't matter.
Right.
So in this case now we could really have rewritten this expression equivalently this way as a set of
parentheses a less than B or some expression or y is that whole expression is in parentheses and then
inside of that we have Furthermore more that it's calculated as a greater than c and not X.
So it's a lot simpler to understand what's happening in this piece of code.
And of course Bob's happy now because he gets it all right.
So my point is you know don't write things that are confusing.
And one of the things that's easily confusing in code is writing boolean expressions without parentheses
and only relying on precedence of operators.
Yes it's fine.
The machine will get it right.
The machine doesn't care if you write it this way or this way.
Python interpreter will work equally well with both but humans are going to have an easier time reading
the second one than the first one.
So enough said I'll keep quite on the subject from now on.
But let's not go and look at short circuit evaluation.
Let's look at all first.
We've seen the truth table before.
And let's you think again and something this is not something I've pointed out before but you'll notice
that the result of or is true in both these cases and it was because X was true.
Remember if we think of it as a switch when X is true then the result is true no matter what.
Why is why can be true or false.
It doesn't matter.
Current will still flow through the switch.
So if X is true then X or Y will be true no matter the value of y.
Another was another way of saying this is that X or Y can return true without evaluating Y if X is true
and so that's what happens if X is true.
Then we can return true without even calculating y.
That's short circuiting the calculation of why we're short circuiting the evaluation of why it works
the same thing with and the same way.
Except that with.
And you'll notice that we have always a false value when X is false.
So if you think of switches again if X is false which means the switch is open then it doesn't matter
what the state of y is if it's true or false.
The result will be false because nothing can flow through because of the force switch and so if X is
false then x and y will be false no matter the value of y.
Again we can see this in the truth table over here.
Another way of saying that is that x and y will return false without evaluating y.
If X is false.
So again it's short circuiting the evaluation of Y when X is false.
It doesn't need to because we don't care.
It doesn't matter.
So that is short circuiting and that can be useful in a number of cases the number of scenarios.
So let's take a look at the first scenario.
Let's say that you have a data feed of lists of stock symbols and some maybe associated financial data.
Maybe it's the number of shares traded or real whatever it is this is just an example.
So suppose that you've got this feed of data that you're getting and you've got stock symbols that come
in.
And your job is to monitor the feed looking for some specific stock symbols you're only interested in
a few stock symbols out of the you know thousands and tens of thousands that are coming through.
You only interested in a few.
And you also want to take some action.
If the price of that stock is above some certain threshold but getting the current price of a stock
and that's the caveat here has a cost.
Maybe it's a hand-cuffs Maybe every time you make a request to say hey give me the price of Apple at
the at the moment it's going to maybe cost you something.
Or maybe it cost you something in terms of resources you have to open up a database connection or maybe
you have to set up an issue GTP connection to an API and then you get to make a call to the API in that
API has to make a call to some database somewhere.
So the point is that there's a cost associated with getting the price of that symbol.
So let's see how we might code this.
Let's assume we didn't have short circuiting it all then you would probably write it this way.
The first thing is you would have an alter if if symbol in watchlist.
All right so the first thing is is the symbol one that we're interested in.
So this watch list would be a list of symbols.
Right.
And we're going to check to see if the symbol we just received in the field is in that list.
If that's the case now we go and retrieve the price.
And if the price of the symbol is greater than some threshold then we go ahead and do something or other.
So the thing here is that coaling the price method has a cost.
So you don't want to call the price method every time you want to you know make sure that you're not
racking up your costs looking up the price of a symbol that you're not even interested in.
So we could write it this way.
However if we do have short circuiting we can write it equivalently this way if symbol in Watchlist
and price of symbol is greater than threshold do something.
Well that's equivalent because of the short circuiting.
If the symbol is not in the watch list then this will evaluate to false.
And because of short circuiting falls and anything is always false this will actually not get evaluated.
Python will not run this bout of the and statement because it says while I don't need to know this is
false.
So I can basically skip the spout and just return false and the result of this statement's expression
here would be false and we wouldn't execute the code of course on the other hand if the symbol is in
the watch list then this returns true that point there is no short circuiting.
And and when you are forced to operate operand is true.
So it's going to have to evaluate the second operand.
And and so now it will go ahead and run that.
So at that point this runs but only if this thing here is true if it's false.
It never runs.
And so it's equivalent to writing this nested IF statement All right.
Another example might be let's say you were returning a name from a database and let's suppose that
it's a nullable string.
So your name can be in three different states.
Right.
It can be a no.
Which means that typically you would end up with a none object in Python.
It kind of depends on you know the database connection to using what the database API that you're using
the library and so on.
So but typically not in the database translates back to a non object in Python.
Or it could be just an empty string.
It's OK to have an empty string in a text field in a database.
So it might be that it's not the same thing as no though right.
None.
An empty string are not the same thing.
Or it could actually contain characters.
So those are the three possible states of a name.
And let's say that we want to perform some action.
If the first character in the string is a digit right.
0 through 9.
So you might be tempted to write something like this.
We might write if name 0 in string of digits.
And that just takes the first character of name and strings of digits will string is a module you can
import and digits just a string that contains 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9.
We'll see that in the code when we switch to that arm.
But this just basically checks to see is the first character of name in one of those digits is it.
Is it a digit.
If it is do something or other.
Well this is OK but it's going to break right.
It's going to break if name is none.
Or if it's an empty string if name is none well known doesn't have you know you can't find an index.
None of the non-object is not a sequence type.
It's not indexable same thing.
If the string is empty.
Yes at this point you can use indexes.
But since the string is empty there is nothing in position 0 that is also going to break our code.
So that's not going to work.
What we need to do is to really say well I want name to not be none to also not be empty.
And then and only then do I want to check if the first character of name is a digit.
So we could just write it this way by using short circuiting and truth values if name and name zero
and string of digits.
So let's see what this does.
Well first of all name is an object.
But we're looking at the truthiness of this object.
And remember that name will be false if it's none.
None is always falsie name will also be falsie if it's an empty sequence and otherwise it will be truthy.
So look at what happens here.
If name is falsie then because of short circuiting this does not get executed.
Name zero does not get evaluated.
So if name is truthy then it evaluates the name of zero but name can only be truthy if it contains characters.
Otherwise it would be falsie would either be none or an empty string.
And so we're only going to execute the second part here which was the one that was causing us a problem.
If it's OK to do so.
All right.
So if the name is falsie I'm just gonna repeat this.
Either none or an empty string then.
This is not evaluated because of short circuiting so short circuiting can be really interesting and
we'll see some more examples of short circuiting coming up in a future video where that will also be
quite useful.
All right for now let's jump into the code and just take a look at all this in action.
So we'll do that in the next video.
I'll see you in a bit.